1 
 
 
1 CondiƟons for Funding 
1 Which condiƟons must be met for your vocaƟonal training to be eligible for funding? 
1.1 Which further training can be funded? 
Provided the respecƟve prerequisites are met, vocaƟonal further training or the catching-up 
(subsequent acquisiƟon) of a vocaƟonal qualiﬁcaƟon can be funded. 
1.1.1 Necessity of the further training 
A vocaƟonal further training should signiﬁcantly improve your job placement prospects. 
When funding vocaƟonal further training, your skills, previous professional career and prior 
knowledge, and your personal prerequisites such as suitability and mobility are taken into 
account. Based on these factors and aŌer detailed counselling, the Employment Agency 
decides whether you need a qualiﬁcaƟon for professional integraƟon. The demand on the 
labor market and your willingness to be mobile are of parƟcular importance here. The 
necessity of the further training can be recognized for ending or avoiding unemployment. 
The goal is your lasƟng reintegraƟon into the primary labor market. 
1.1.2 Catching up a vocaƟonal qualiﬁcaƟon 
If you are low-qualiﬁed, under certain condiƟons you have a legal claim to funding for the 
subsequent acquisiƟon of a vocaƟonal qualiﬁcaƟon. 
A person is considered low-qualiﬁed if they do not hold a qualiﬁcaƟon in an occupaƟon with 
at least two years of vocaƟonal training, or if they are considered "re-unskilled." A "re-
unskilled" person is someone who, although holding a vocaƟonal qualiﬁcaƟon, is unlikely to 
be able to pracƟse the learned profession anymore due to having performed skilled or 
unskilled work for more than four years. A vocaƟonal qualiﬁcaƟon can, for example, be 
acquired subsequently within the scope of an individual in-company retraining. 
1.2 Counselling 
To determine whether you need vocaƟonal further training, it is essenƟal that you receive 
counselling from the Employment Agency / Jobcenter as early as possible. Arrange an 
appointment with your local Employment Agency / Jobcenter. If you are a client of a 
Jobcenter, note that your Jobcenter can only determine the need for funding of vocaƟonal 
training and carry out a preliminary suitability check. AŌer that, the Employment Agency is 
involved. The Employment Agency then conducts the further training counselling in 
accordance with §§81 et seq. of SGB III and ﬁnally checks the funding prerequisites. 
During this counselling your quesƟons related to vocaƟonal further training will be discussed 
and it will be determined whether the prerequisites for funding are met. It may also be 
2 
 
sensible, to determine your suitability, to arrange an appointment with the Medical Service 
or the OccupaƟonal Psychological Service of the Employment Agency. 
1.3 Training voucher (Bildungsgutschein) 
If the prerequisites for funding are met, you will receive a training voucher 
(Bildungsgutschein) which guarantees that the training costs and, where applicable, 
conƟnued payment of unemployment beneﬁt or ciƟzen's beneﬁt will be covered. 
The training voucher is valid for a limited period and can be restricted to a speciﬁc region. A 
concrete training objecƟve is always speciﬁed on the voucher. During the voucher’s validity 
you may choose an approved measure that corresponds to the voucher. You can ﬁnd 
measures on the KURSNET entry page of the Employment Agency website and on 
www.mein-now.de. 
The voucher version intended for the chosen provider — by which the provider conﬁrms 
your admission to the measure — must be submiƩed to the Employment Agency within the 
voucher’s validity period and before the start of your parƟcipaƟon. 
Tip: To ensure that the beneﬁts due to you can be approved in good Ɵme, you should submit 
the required documents to your Employment Agency in a Ɵmely manner before the start of 
parƟcipaƟon. 
1.4 Trainings commissioned by Employment Agencies 
In addiƟon to funding via the training voucher, there is also the possibility to parƟcipate in a 
commissioned measure. In this case a training provider conducts the further training on 
behalf of the Employment Agency. Instead of the training voucher, where you can choose the 
provider yourself, you will receive an oﬀer to parƟcipate in a speciﬁc training course. 
Employment Agencies can commission providers with the implementaƟon of the following 
measures: 
 Measures to acquire basic competencies (see also 1.7), 
 Combined measures “acquisiƟon of basic competencies” and further training that 
lead to a qualiﬁcaƟon in an apprenƟceship occupaƟon (retraining), or 
 Measures that accompany in-company further training which leads to a vocaƟonal 
qualiﬁcaƟon (in-company retraining), i.e., retraining-accompanying assistance (see 
also 1.8). 
1.5 Approval of the provider and the measure 
The training provider and the intended measure must be approved for further training 
funding by a competent authority in accordance with the AccreditaƟon and Approval 
Ordinance for Employment PromoƟon (AZAV). 
3 
 
Note: The training provider or the respecƟve oﬀering in the search portals will inform you 
about this. 
1.6 Subsequent acquisiƟon of a lower secondary school cerƟﬁcate (Hauptschulabschluss) 
Under certain condiƟons there is a legal claim to the subsequent acquisiƟon of a lower 
secondary school cerƟﬁcate or an equivalent school leaving cerƟﬁcate. Funding for the lower 
secondary school cerƟﬁcate is usually provided in combinaƟon with a previously individually 
determined vocaƟonal further training measure. 
1.7 AcquisiƟon of basic competencies 
To prepare for further training or to improve employability, clients can receive funding for 
acquiring necessary basic competencies in the areas of reading, wriƟng, mathemaƟcs, and 
informaƟon and communicaƟon technologies. 
1.8 Retraining-accompanying assistance (ubH) 
Retraining-accompanying assistance (ubH) is funded in connecƟon with in-company 
individual retrainings. An in-company individual retraining takes place, like dual vocaƟonal 
training, in a company. The total duraƟon of the ubH, the weekly Ɵme requirement, and the 
content are determined by the individual needs of the case with a view to successful 
parƟcipaƟon in the retraining. 
 
2 How to ﬁnd the right training course 
You have received a training voucher (Bildungsgutschein) from your Employment Agency. It 
speciﬁes the training objecƟve and the qualiﬁcaƟon contents that are intended to 
signiﬁcantly improve your chances of integraƟon into the labor market. It is now up to you to 
choose a suitable course from a training provider of your choice. To help you make the right 
choice, a wide range of informaƟon opƟons is available: 
 When it comes to your professional development, use the many opƟons at » 
www.arbeitsagentur.de. In the online services of the Federal Employment Agency you 
will ﬁnd further-training and qualiﬁcaƟon programmes in your chosen occupaƟon and 
a number of other search opƟons and background informaƟon. The occupaƟonal 
informaƟon on labor-market opportuniƟes, further-training opƟons and 
corresponding oﬀers is presented to you in a clear and structured way. In addiƟon to 
an overview of further training, you will also ﬁnd the topics career change and re-
entry. In New Plan you can use suitable tests to learn more about your strengths and 
ﬁnd out what kind of job suits you. You can also get inspiraƟon in New Plan from the 
career changes of other people and ﬁnd a lot of useful informaƟon about these 
occupaƟons. In addiƟon, for selected occupaƟons you can carry out a self-assessment 
in the form of a BERUFECHECK. 
4 
 
LINK 
You can ﬁnd the service at » www.arbeitsagentur.de » Karriere und Weiterbildung 
 With the service “Weiterbildungssuche”, which is part of “mein NOW – the NaƟonal 
Online Portal for VocaƟonal Further Training”, you have a useful tool at » 
www.mein-now.de that helps you ﬁnd the right vocaƟonal further training. 
 The entry page » www.arbeitsagentur.de/kursnet leads you to the search module that 
best matches your concern. From there, for example, you can get to oﬀers for 
vocaƟonal further training (» www.mein-now.de/weiterbildungssuche), to a 
retraining (Umschulung) or to programmes for catching up on a vocaƟonal 
qualiﬁcaƟon (» www.arbeitsagentur.de/berufsausbildung). 
 You can also obtain informaƟon directly from all training providers. 
 
What you should pay aƩenƟon to: 
 Before you register for a course, please check with the training provider whether the 
course you have chosen is approved under Book III of the Social Code (SGB III) and 
whether it corresponds to the training objecƟve and qualiﬁcaƟon contents speciﬁed 
in your training voucher. You can only redeem your training voucher for such courses. 
If in doubt, please talk to your Employment Agency. 
 Entry into the further training must take place within the period of validity. 
Otherwise the training voucher expires and you would have to apply for a new 
voucher. 
 Submission of the training voucher to your Employment Agency must take place 
before the start of the further training. 
 The training voucher gives you the opƟon to choose a course usually within the daily 
commuƟng area of your place of residence. The daily commuƟng area is the region 
that can be reached by public transport within reasonable commuƟng Ɵmes. If the 
daily course Ɵme is more than six hours, a total commuƟng Ɵme (outward and return 
journey) of up to two and a half hours is considered reasonable. If the daily course 
Ɵme is less than six hours, the reasonable commuƟng Ɵme is reduced to a total of 
two hours. 
 If, in an individual case, the course you have chosen does not start within the validity 
period of your voucher or if you cannot ﬁnd a suitable course, please contact your 
Employment Agency immediately. 
NOTE 
To support people interested in further training in choosing a professionally suitable and 
high-quality training measure, the Federal InsƟtute for VocaƟonal EducaƟon and Training 
5 
 
(BIBB) provides a checklist. It cannot and should not replace a personal counselling interview 
and is mainly aimed at those who have already basically informed themselves about which 
type of further training is suitable for them (» www.bibb.de/checkliste). 
 
Ask the provider the following: 
 Ask the training provider how many parƟcipants of the most recently completed 
course found a job aŌerwards. 
 Ask the provider how they will support you in looking for a new job. 
 Ask the provider to show you the classrooms and the technical equipment. 
 Ask about the learning formats: Is the course held only in face-to-face classes or are 
there also online learning phases? How are these scheduled? 
 Ask what qualiﬁcaƟons the teaching staﬀ have. If German is your second language, 
ask how the teaching staﬀ can respond to this. 
 Many providers oﬀer a free “trial lesson” or an “open day.” You should deﬁnitely 
make use of this oﬀer. 
 OŌen, a pracƟcal internship is planned during a course. You should acƟvely 
parƟcipate in ﬁnding a suitable internship place. Your own iniƟaƟve is oŌen the ﬁrst 
step to a new job! 
3 Which beneﬁts are funded? 
3 Which beneﬁts are funded and to what extent? 
3.1 Training (further educaƟon) costs 
Training costs are the costs that arise directly from the further training: 
 course (tuiƟon) fees and, where applicable, costs for a necessary apƟtude/suitability 
assessment, 
 travel costs, 
 costs for necessary accommodaƟon away from home and meals, 
 costs for the care of children in need of supervision, and 
 costs for any necessary socio-pedagogical support during parƟcipaƟon in the 
measure. 
If a third party (e.g. your employer) pays part or all of the costs of the measure (e.g. course 
fees), the Employment Agency will only cover the costs that remain aŌer the amounts paid 
by the third party have been deducted. 
6 
 
If you are a Jobcenter client and you no longer need beneﬁts to secure your livelihood 
(ciƟzen’s beneﬁt/Bürgergeld) during the course of the measure — e.g. because your 
partner’s income is suﬃcient — you may sƟll conƟnue to take part in the measure. 
 
3.1.1 Course (tuiƟon) costs 
Course costs can include: 
 course fees, 
 costs for the necessary learning materials, 
 work clothing, 
 examinaƟon pieces, 
 examinaƟon fees for legally regulated or generally recognized interim and ﬁnal 
examinaƟons, 
insofar as these are necessary costs. 
Work clothing and learning materials that you need during the measure are, as a rule, 
provided to you by the training provider. 
Costs for necessary socio-pedagogical support, including coaching, can also be covered as 
part of the reimbursement of course costs. 
 
3.1.2 Travel costs 
Travel costs can be covered 
 for journeys between home and the training locaƟon (commuƟng trips), 
 in case of necessary accommodaƟon away from home: for arrival and departure and 
for one family trip home per month, or instead of the family trip home, one monthly 
trip of a family member to your place of stay. 
Travel costs are reimbursed up to the amount that would be incurred when using the most 
appropriate, regularly operaƟng public means of transport in the lowest class. 
The costs for a DeutschlandƟcket can also be reimbursed if no cheaper Ɵckets can be used. 
If you use another means of transport (e.g. your own car), a distance allowance is paid in 
accordance with § 5 (1) of the Federal Travel Expenses Act (BRKG), which is €0.20 per 
kilometre travelled. 
If you, as a Jobcenter client, can obtain discounted access to local public transport, this will 
be taken into account when reimbursing travel costs. 
7 
 
For arrival and departure in case of necessary accommodaƟon away from home, as well as 
for one monthly family trip home, the costs of the most appropriate public transport in the 
lowest class are reimbursed. 
If other means of transport are used, €0.20 per kilometre between your home and the 
training locaƟon is paid for the arrival, departure and one monthly family trip home. 
For arrival, departure and the monthly family trip home, a maximum amount of €130 is 
applied each when using other means of transport. 
Monthly commuƟng costs can be covered up to €588. 
NOTE 
Your kilometre informaƟon for travel costs will be checked by the Employment Agency using 
an online route planner. Processing is faster if you aƩach a printout of the distance 
calculaƟon. 
 
3.1.3 AccommodaƟon away from home 
If you have to stay outside your home because of the training, the following can be paid: 
 for accommodaƟon: €60 per day, but no more than €420 per calendar month. 
 for meals: €24 per day, but no more than €168 per calendar month. 
 
3.1.4 Childcare costs 
Costs for the care of children in need of supervision of the employee parƟcipaƟng in the 
measure can be covered up to €160 per month per child. 
Children are generally considered to be in need of supervision if they have not yet reached 
the age of 15. 
If a third party (e.g. the Youth Welfare Oﬃce) already pays beneﬁts for childcare, this third 
party must be informed that childcare costs are also being paid by the parƟcipant. 
NOTE 
For informaƟon on childcare costs, the form “QuesƟonnaire on the funding of parƟcipaƟon 
in a vocaƟonal further training measure” must be used. 
 
3.2 Beneﬁts related to parƟcipaƟon in a qualiﬁcaƟon-oriented (abschlussorienƟerte) 
training 
8 
 
ParƟcipants in qualiﬁcaƟon-oriented trainings such as retrainings (Umschulungen), 
modular/parƟal qualiﬁcaƟons, or preparatory courses for external examinaƟons / school-
external examinaƟons can receive addiƟonal beneﬁts. 
 
3.2.1 Training allowance (Weiterbildungsgeld) 
ParƟcipants in funded qualiﬁcaƟon-oriented trainings receive a monthly allowance of €150 
(Weiterbildungsgeld). 
 
3.2.2 Training bonus (Weiterbildungsprämie) 
For certain trainings you can receive a training bonus. 
 For successfully passed interim examinaƟons in the context of a retraining: €1,000. 
(Prerequisite: the relevant vocaƟonal training act or training regulaƟon provides for 
an interim examinaƟon.) 
 For passing the ﬁnal examinaƟon in the context of a retraining or an external / non-
student examinaƟon: €1,500. 
To receive the bonus, you must submit to your Employment Agency an oﬃcial ﬁnal proof 
from the examining body showing that you have successfully passed the interim or ﬁnal 
examinaƟon (e.g. a copy of the chamber cerƟﬁcate). 
 
3.3 Beneﬁts for living expenses 
Unemployment beneﬁt (Arbeitslosengeld) 
For the duraƟon of a funded further training, unemployment beneﬁt is paid as long as the 
eligibility requirements for unemployment beneﬁt are met. 
The regulaƟons for unemployment beneﬁt conƟnue to apply unchanged even during the 
further training. 
You can ﬁnd detailed informaƟon on unemployment beneﬁt in “InformaƟon Sheet 1 for 
Unemployed Persons (MerkblaƩ 1 für Arbeitslose)”, which is available from your 
Employment Agency. 
ReducƟon of enƟtlement more slowly 
During funded further training, your enƟtlement period is reduced more slowly: 
for every two days on which you receive unemployment beneﬁt because of vocaƟonal 
further training, your enƟtlement is reduced by only one day. 
9 
 
EXAMPLE 
You take part in a funded further training from 01.06. to 30.09. (four months) and receive 
unemployment beneﬁt during this Ɵme. 
The enƟtlement period is reduced at a raƟo of 2 to 1, so that for four months of beneﬁt 
receipt the enƟtlement is reduced by two months. 
A reducƟon does not take place at all if, at the beginning of the training, your remaining 
enƟtlement is 90 days or less. 
If, because of the reducƟon during training, your remaining enƟtlement reaches 90 days, no 
further reducƟon occurs. 
This ensures that aŌer compleƟon of the training, if you are sƟll unemployed, you sƟll have 
at least 90 days of unemployment beneﬁt. 
If you had less than 90 days remaining at the beginning, only this remaining enƟtlement can 
be used. 
If, at the start of training, the remaining enƟtlement is less than 90 days and you are funded 
for at least six consecuƟve months, the enƟtlement is increased once to 90 days. 
 
CiƟzen’s beneﬁt (Bürgergeld) for employable persons 
For the duraƟon of a funded training, Bürgergeld conƟnues to be paid as long as the 
requirements for these beneﬁts are met. 
You can obtain detailed informaƟon from your Jobcenter and from the leaﬂet “Bürgergeld – 
Basic Income Support for Jobseekers – SGB II” which your Jobcenter provides. 
 
4 Credit of Income (Anrechnung von Einkommen) 
4.1 CrediƟng of income 
If you carry out employment, self-employment, or work as an assisƟng family member 
during the measure, the resulƟng secondary income is credited (oﬀset) against your 
unemployment beneﬁt. 
InformaƟon about the crediƟng of secondary income can be found in the leaﬂet “Useful 
InformaƟon on the Topic of Secondary Income”. 
LINK 
You can ﬁnd the leaﬂet under 
» www.arbeitsagentur.de → Download Center → Arbeitslos und Arbeit ﬁnden → 
Arbeitslosengeld – Nebeneinkommen. 
LINK 
For the CiƟzen’s Beneﬁt (Bürgergeld) for employable persons, diﬀerent rules for income 
10 
 
crediƟng apply. These can be found in the leaﬂet “Bürgergeld – Basic Income Support for 
Jobseekers – SGB II.” 
 
4.2 CrediƟng of beneﬁts 
If, as a recipient of unemployment beneﬁt, you receive wages, remuneraƟon, or other 
allowances intended for your livelihood from your employer or the training provider due to 
parƟcipaƟon in the measure — or from a previous or exisƟng employment relaƟonship (even 
without performing work) — the following applies: 
AŌer deducƟon of taxes and social insurance contribuƟons (including unemployment 
insurance) and a tax-free allowance of €400 per month, the remaining amount is credited 
against your unemployment beneﬁt. 
EXAMPLE 
You receive €500 net per month from your employer during your training. AŌer deducƟng 
the €400 monthly allowance, €100 per month will be oﬀset against your unemployment 
beneﬁt. 
LINK 
The form “CerƟﬁcate on Employer/Provider Beneﬁts” (Bescheinigung über Arbeitgeber-
/Trägerleistungen) can be found at 
» www.arbeitsagentur.de/formulare-a-z → Weiterbildungskurse – Bescheinigungen. 
NOTE 
For CiƟzen’s Beneﬁt (Bürgergeld), the above rule diﬀers: 
Such allowances are counted as income when calculaƟng CiƟzen’s Beneﬁt for employable 
persons. For further details, please contact your personal adviser. 
 
5 Health, Nursing Care, Pension, and Accident Insurance 
(5 Die Kranken-, Pﬂege-, Renten- und Unfallversicherung) 
 
5.1 Health and Nursing Care Insurance 
While you are receiving unemployment beneﬁt (Arbeitslosengeld) or ciƟzen’s beneﬁt 
(Bürgergeld) as an employable person, you are in principle compulsorily insured under the 
statutory health and nursing care insurance systems. 
Health and nursing care insurance are provided by the health insurance fund (Krankenkasse) 
with which you are registered. The Employment Agency or Jobcenter (or the responsible 
basic security authority) pays the full contribuƟons for these insurances. 
11 
 
NOTE 
You can ﬁnd more informaƟon in 
» MerkblaƩ 1 für Arbeitslose (InformaƟon Leaﬂet 1 for Unemployed Persons) or 
» MerkblaƩ “Bürgergeld – Grundsicherung für Arbeitsuchende – SGB II” (CiƟzen’s Beneﬁt – 
Basic Income Support for Jobseekers – SGB II). 
If you do not receive any beneﬁts, you are not insured through these authoriƟes. 
In that case, you must contact your last responsible health insurance fund yourself. 
 
5.2 Pension Insurance 
If you receive unemployment beneﬁt, you are generally compulsorily insured under the 
statutory pension insurance scheme. 
During your beneﬁt period, the Employment Agency pays the compulsory pension 
contribuƟons to the pension insurance insƟtuƟon. 
NOTE 
More informaƟon can be found in MerkblaƩ 1 für Arbeitslose. 
If you receive ciƟzen’s beneﬁt (Bürgergeld), you are not compulsorily insured in the statutory 
pension scheme. 
However, the Jobcenter reports your Bürgergeld period to the pension insurance provider, 
which checks whether it counts as a credited period (Anrechnungszeit). 
 
5.3 Accident Insurance 
As a parƟcipant in a vocaƟonal training measure, you are insured against accidents during: 
 the scheduled pracƟcal and theoreƟcal sessions, and 
 the journey between your home and the training locaƟon and back. 
The accident insurance provider in these cases is the employers’ liability insurance 
associaƟon (BerufsgenossenschaŌ) to which the training provider (training insƟtuƟon, 
company, etc.) belongs. 
Accident reports must therefore be sent to the responsible BerufsgenossenschaŌ, not to the 
Employment Agency / Jobcenter or the basic security authority. 
If you receive unemployment beneﬁt or ciƟzen’s beneﬁt, you are also insured against 
accidents when you, at the request of the Employment Agency / Jobcenter, aƩend 
appointments at those oﬃces or other authoriƟes (e.g. for a medical examinaƟon). 
In such cases, you must report the accident immediately to your Employment Agency or 
Jobcenter. 
12 
 
Here, the responsible accident insurance insƟtuƟon is Unfallkasse Bund und Bahn, not the 
BerufsgenossenschaŌ of the training provider. 
 
6 Employee QualiﬁcaƟon (BeschäŌigtenqualiﬁzierung) 
The Employment Agencies have various opƟons to promote the further training of 
employees, in order to support companies in dealing with challenges such as structural 
change, digitalizaƟon, and the shortage of skilled workers. 
 
6.1 Funding of employed workers 
Employed workers can also be supported through parƟal or full coverage of further-training 
costs. 
In addiƟon, their employers can receive a wage subsidy for working Ɵme lost due to training. 
The type and scope of funding depend largely on the size of the company. 
Your Employment Agency will inform you in detail about the speciﬁc funding condiƟons. 
For employed workers, the issue of a training voucher (Bildungsgutschein) can be waived, if 
both the employer and the employee agree to this, or if the funding is part of a collecƟve 
applicaƟon procedure (Sammelantragsverfahren). 
Under the collecƟve applicaƟon procedure, the employer can submit a single applicaƟon for 
the funding of vocaƟonal training for mulƟple employees. 
Employers receive advice from the Employment Agency in this process. 
Other training-related costs, such as travel expenses or childcare costs, are only covered for 
employees if they arise addiƟonally because of parƟcipaƟon in the training. 
For employees parƟcipaƟng in training through the collecƟve applicaƟon procedure, special 
rules apply. 
Also, disability-related addiƟonal costs that are necessary for parƟcipaƟon in the measure 
are covered. 
The claim for reimbursement is submiƩed by the parƟcipant in the funded training measure. 
 
6.2 QualiﬁcaƟon Allowance (Qualiﬁzierungsgeld) 
The qualiﬁcaƟon allowance is a wage replacement beneﬁt designed to enable employees to 
remain in their current company despite changing job requirements caused by structural 
transformaƟon, by parƟcipaƟng in further training. 
It amounts to 60% (or 67%) of the net income lost due to the training period. 
13 
 
The costs of the training itself are ﬁnanced by the employer. 
Necessary disability-related addiƟonal expenses (as menƟoned above) that arise in 
connecƟon with parƟcipaƟon in the funded measure are also covered. 
The claim is made by the parƟcipant in the training measure funded with the qualiﬁcaƟon 
allowance. 
Further informaƟon can be found in the 
LINK 
» InformaƟon Sheet on the QualiﬁcaƟon Allowance (MerkblaƩ Qualiﬁzierungsgeld). 
 
6.3 VocaƟonal further training during short-Ɵme work in transfer companies 
(Beruﬂiche Weiterbildung bei Transferkurzarbeitergeld) 
The Employment Agencies can also support employees who receive Transfer Short-Time 
Allowance (Transferkurzarbeitergeld). 
For training measures that end during the period of receiving transfer short-Ɵme allowance, 
the training costs can be parƟally covered, provided that the employer contributes at least 
 50% of the course costs (for companies with 250 or more employees), or 
 25% of the course costs (for companies with fewer than 250 employees). 
For parƟcipaƟon in training measures that end aŌer the period of receiving transfer short-
Ɵme allowance, the Employment Agency covers the full course costs aŌer the end of the 
allowance period. 
If you are enƟtled to unemployment beneﬁt during further training, this beneﬁt will be paid 
aŌer the end of the transfer short-Ɵme allowance period. 
 
7 Responsibility (Zuständigkeit) 
You must apply for beneﬁts for the promoƟon of vocaƟonal further training at the 
Employment Agency responsible for the district in which you reside. 
 
PLEASE NOTE 
Help facilitate the decision-making process regarding your beneﬁts by ﬁlling out the forms 
carefully and submiƫng them completely before the start of the training measure. 
The Employment Agency relies on the accuracy of the informaƟon you provide. 
14 
 
Some of your personal data may already be pre-printed on the forms when you receive 
them from the Employment Agency. 
Before submiƫng the documents, check all informaƟon carefully, as changes — for 
example, due to a move — may have occurred. 
For employed persons who parƟcipate in vocaƟonal training through the collecƟve 
applicaƟon procedure (Sammelantragsverfahren), special regulaƟons apply. 
 
8 Decision (Bescheid) 
The Employment Agency will inform you of its decision regarding the training costs you 
applied for in wriƟng. 
During the period of funded vocaƟonal training, unemployment beneﬁt will conƟnue to be 
paid as long as the enƟtlement requirements remain in place. 
You will usually receive a separate wriƩen decision (noƟce) only if there are changes to your 
beneﬁt enƟtlement. 
You will also receive a wriƩen decision if: 
 your applicaƟon is not approved, or only parƟally approved, 
 the amount of training costs changes, 
 the payment of beneﬁts must be completely disconƟnued, or 
 you have received beneﬁts improperly and are required to repay them. 
The CiƟzen’s Beneﬁt (Bürgergeld) for employable persons will conƟnue to be granted as long 
as neediness exists. 
 
9 Appeal against Decisions (Widerspruch gegen Entscheidungen) 
If you disagree with a wriƩen decision (noƟce) issued by the Employment Agency, you may 
ﬁle an appeal (Widerspruch) against it. 
Filing an appeal causes the Employment Agency to review its decision once again. 
If you wish to submit an appeal, you must do so within one month aŌer the decision has 
been oﬃcially communicated to you. 
The appeal must be: 
 submiƩed in wriƟng or electronically, or 
 declared in person at the Employment Agency that issued the decision. 
15 
 
Please refer to the legal remedy secƟon (Rechtsbehelfsbelehrung) of the decision you wish 
to appeal for more details. 
If your appeal cannot be granted — or only parƟally granted — you will receive a wriƩen 
appeal decision (Widerspruchsbescheid). 
You can then ﬁle a lawsuit (Klage) against it. 
The court, Ɵme limit, and form in which the lawsuit must be ﬁled are speciﬁed in the legal 
remedy secƟon of the appeal decision. 
In the event of a lawsuit, the Employment Agency must submit the complete beneﬁt records 
to the Social Court (Sozialgericht). 
Medical and psychological reports in these ﬁles will be excluded from submission only if you 
have explicitly objected to their transfer. 
 
10 Payment of Beneﬁts (Auszahlung der Leistungen) 
 
10.1 Payment Procedure 
Unemployment beneﬁt and the amounts that the Employment Agency covers for training 
costs are paid free of charge only if you have them transferred to a domesƟc or foreign bank 
account within the SEPA area, 
or if you can prove that, through no fault of your own, it was not possible for you to open a 
domesƟc bank account. 
If you do not yet have a bank account, it is in your interest to open one immediately. 
If you do not have your beneﬁts transferred to a SEPA account and cannot prove that you 
were unable to open a domesƟc account, 
the beneﬁts will be paid via a payment order for seƩlement (Zahlungsanweisung zur 
Verrechnung, ZzV) through Postbank, 
with processing fees deducted from the payment. 
The payment order (ZzV) is delivered by Deutsche Post and can be cashed within one month 
at any payment oﬃce of Deutsche Post or Deutsche Postbank. 
If you have proven that you were not at fault for being unable to open an account, the ZzV 
will be sent to you free of charge. 
Otherwise, a basic fee of €3.85 is deducted for each ZzV issued. 
If you cash the ZzV at a Post oﬃce, an addiƟonal amount-dependent fee will be deducted as 
follows: 
 up to €50.00 → €3.50 
16 
 
 more than €50.00 to €250.00 → €4.00 
 more than €250.00 to €500.00 → €5.00 
 more than €500.00 to €1,000.00 → €6.00 
 more than €1,000.00 to €1,500.00 → €7.50 
If you submit the ZzV to a bank for crediƟng to your account, no fee will be charged. 
All payments made by the Employment Agency (except for the training 
allowance/Weiterbildungsgeld) are coded with a four-digit idenƟﬁer on your account 
statement or payment order. 
You will ﬁnd this same code in your approval noƟce. 
If you already received unemployment beneﬁt before starƟng your training, the code may 
change during your parƟcipaƟon period. 
Your ongoing beneﬁt enƟtlements can be transferred, pledged, or garnished just like wages. 
To protect your beneﬁts from garnishment, you should open a protected account 
(Pfändungsschutzkonto) under §850k of the German Code of Civil Procedure (ZPO) and have 
your beneﬁts transferred there. 
Within the protecƟon limits, the money in this account cannot be seized. 
 
10.2 Payment Dates 
Unemployment beneﬁt is usually paid monthly in arrears, 
while ciƟzen’s beneﬁt (Bürgergeld) for employable persons is paid monthly in advance. 
Training-related beneﬁts (e.g. course fees) are generally paid directly to the training 
provider. 
If beneﬁts are paid to you, course costs and related expenses (e.g. travel costs) are usually 
paid monthly in advance. 
If you are enƟtled to the training allowance (Weiterbildungsgeld), it will be paid aŌer the 
month of parƟcipaƟon (i.e. retrospecƟvely). 
The Ɵme period for which the transfer applies will be shown on your account statement or 
payment order. 
Individual payments under €10 are not paid immediately but accumulated unƟl the amount 
reaches €10. 
However, if this would result in no payment for more than six months, a smaller amount will 
generally be paid. 
17 
 
Payment may also be postponed if it is not made to a bank account and, aŌer deducƟng the 
€3.85 processing fee, the remaining amount would be too small to pay out. 
 
10.3 First Payment 
You can ﬁnd out when to expect your ﬁrst payment when you submit your documents to the 
Employment Agency. 
If a ﬁnal decision is not yet possible, you may receive an advance payment (Vorschuss) if it is 
clear that you are basically enƟtled to beneﬁts, but determining the exact amount will take 
more Ɵme. 
If it is sƟll uncertain whether you are enƟtled to beneﬁts, the Employment Agency may issue 
a provisional decision if: 
 determining the ﬁnal eligibility will likely take Ɵme, 
 but it already appears suﬃciently probable that the requirements are met, and 
 the delay is not your fault. 
The Employment Agency will automaƟcally check — without any special request — whether 
an advance or a provisional decision can be made. 
Any advances or payments made under a provisional decision must be repaid if it is later 
determined that you were not enƟtled to them, 
or if the amount exceeds what you were actually enƟtled to receive. 
 
PLEASE NOTE 
If you have quesƟons about transfers or about the amount or duraƟon of your beneﬁts, 
please contact your Employment Agency. 
 
11 DuƟes of Disclosure, CooperaƟon, and Repayment 
(AuskunŌs-, Mitwirkungs- und ErstaƩungspﬂichten) 
 
11.1 Duty to Provide InformaƟon (AuskunŌspﬂichten) 
Employees who are currently parƟcipaƟng or have parƟcipated in vocaƟonal training 
measures funded by the Employment Agency are obliged to: 
18 
 
 provide the Employment Agency / Jobcenter or the training provider with 
informaƟon, upon request, about the success of the measure and any other data 
necessary for quality evaluaƟon, and 
 allow the training provider to issue an assessment of their performance and 
behavior during the measure. 
 
11.2 Duty to Cooperate (Mitwirkungspﬂichten) 
When you apply for or receive beneﬁts, you must provide all informaƟon requested in the 
applicaƟon that is relevant to approval. 
You may also be required to: 
 give consent for third parƟes to provide informaƟon, 
 name or submit evidence (documents, cerƟﬁcates), 
 appear in person, or 
 aƩend a medical or psychological examinaƟon. 
ParƟcipaƟon in the examinaƟon itself is voluntary, 
but please note: if you refuse to cooperate in an examinaƟon that is essenƟal for the 
decision, your beneﬁts may be parƟally or fully withdrawn. 
If you fail to meet your cooperaƟon duƟes, the Employment Agency can deny or revoke your 
beneﬁts in whole or in part. 
You are also required to inform your Employment Agency or Jobcenter immediately and 
without being asked (even by phone) of any changes that may aﬀect your enƟtlement. 
This obligaƟon conƟnues even if your applicaƟon has not yet been decided. 
If you are absent from class (e.g. miss days), your training provider must report this. 
NoƟfying other insƟtuƟons (e.g. your health insurance fund or local registraƟon oﬃce) is not 
suﬃcient. 
If you are unsure whether a change aﬀects your beneﬁt enƟtlement, you should sƟll report it 
to your Employment Agency or Jobcenter. 
 
You must inform the Employment Agency / Jobcenter immediately if you: 
 sƟll receive or are enƟtled to wages, severance pay, or holiday compensaƟon from a 
previous job, 
19 
 
 start or perform any employment, self-employment, or family assistance, or if your 
income or working hours increase, 
 receive payments from your employer or training provider due to parƟcipaƟon in a 
measure, or from a previous or exisƟng employment relaƟonship (even without 
working), 
 become incapable of work (sick) or when you recover; if your training provider does 
not forward this informaƟon, inform the agency yourself, 
 apply for or receive maternity allowance, pensions, transiƟon allowance, or any 
third-party beneﬁt for vocaƟonal training, 
 give up your main residence and receive accommodaƟon or meal beneﬁts, 
 move (change address) or change your bank account (IBAN/BIC), 
 fail to start, interrupt, or end your parƟcipaƟon in a measure (even for single days), 
or if the last day of training/exam diﬀers from the original schedule, 
 marry, enter a civil partnership, separate, or end your marriage/partnership, 
 have your tax class changed, apply the factor method, or have the factor adjusted; if 
it remains valid for the next year, submit conﬁrmaƟon from the tax oﬃce, 
 no longer meet the condiƟons for a higher beneﬁt rate (e.g. your child reaches age 
18), 
 perform voluntary military service, federal voluntary service, or youth voluntary 
service, 
 withdraw insured working-Ɵme credit for leave (§§ 7 ﬀ SGB IV), 
 perform a voluntary or honorary acƟvity for at least one week, 
 use diﬀerent routes or transport or your travel costs change, 
 no longer have childcare expenses, 
 receive any training-related payments from your employer or another organizaƟon. 
 
PLEASE NOTE 
The duty to report conƟnues: 
 during holidays, 
 during an appeal or court procedure concerning your beneﬁts, and 
20 
 
 even aŌer your beneﬁts have ended if the changes retroacƟvely aﬀect your 
enƟtlement. 
TIP 
You can easily report changes online at 
» www.arbeitsagentur.de/eServices. 
 
11.3 Duty of Repayment (ErstaƩungspﬂicht) 
Anyone who has received beneﬁts without enƟtlement must repay them once the related 
approval has been withdrawn or revoked, 
or if the beneﬁts were paid without formal approval. 
Repayment includes not only the beneﬁt itself but also the health and nursing insurance 
contribuƟons (around 35% of the beneﬁt) paid on your behalf. 
An approval is revoked retroacƟvely if beneﬁts were not legally due, especially if the person: 
 knowingly or negligently provided false or incomplete informaƟon, or failed to 
report changes in circumstances, 
 knew or should have known that no (or a lower) enƟtlement existed, or 
 earned income that would have reduced or eliminated enƟtlement. 
NOTE 
This applies even if beneﬁts were paid in advance and already spent. 
RevocaƟon of approval is also permiƩed if beneﬁts were not used for their intended 
purpose (e.g. travel costs). 
PLEASE NOTE 
Always provide accurate informaƟon and report changes immediately to your Employment 
Agency or Jobcenter. 
If you give false or incomplete informaƟon or fail to report changes, you may be required to 
repay beneﬁts received in error. 
The Employment Agency may also iniƟate administraƟve oﬀence or criminal proceedings. 
 
12 Data ProtecƟon (Datenschutz) 
The Social Code (Sozialgesetzbuch) protects you—especially—against the unauthorized 
collecƟon and processing of your personal data. 
Your personal data may only be collected, processed, or used if this is permiƩed by law or if 
you have given your consent. 
21 
 
The Employment Agency requires your data to: 
 determine your enƟtlement to unemployment beneﬁt or training costs, and 
 make the corresponding payments. 
Your duty to cooperate arises from SecƟons 60 and following of the Social Code, Book I 
(SGB I). 
 
When you apply for beneﬁts, the necessary personal data are recorded and stored in ﬁles or 
databases. 
These records are normally deleted no later than 10 years aŌer the beneﬁt process has been 
completed; 
automaƟcally stored data are in some cases deleted aŌer 4 years. 
You have the right to: 
 request informaƟon about data stored about you, 
 correct inaccurate data, and 
 in legally deﬁned cases, have your data restricted or deleted. 
 
Your personal data may also be used, to the necessary extent, to carry out other tasks of the 
Federal Employment Agency and its local oﬃces (Employment Agencies / Jobcenters) under 
the Social Code. 
Your data will be shared with external insƟtuƟons (e.g. health insurance funds, pension 
insurance insƟtuƟons, or other authoriƟes) only to the extent permiƩed by law. 
Medical and psychological assessments are excluded from transmission if you have explicitly 
objected to their transfer. 
 
Further informaƟon about data protecƟon can be found at: 
» www.arbeitsagentur.de/datenerhebung